Feature improve documentation (#329)
usnistgov/metaschema: website/content/specification/syntax/instances.md

---
title: "Instances"
Description: ""
weight: 30
---

In a Metaschema module, complex information elements are created through composition. Through composition, an information element can be built by indicating which other information elements are used as its constituent parts.

> An *instance* is used to declare an information element *child* within a *parent* information element. In a Metaschema module, the parent information element is a definition, either a *field definition* or an *assembly definition*. The instance is a *flag instance*, *field instance*, or *assembly instance*, which in turn either references an existing [*top-level definition*](/specification/syntax/definitions/) by name or provides a [*inline definition*](/specification/syntax/inline-definitions/) as part of the instance declaration.

Reviewer: Consider reversing this?

```suggestion
An *instance* is used to declare an information element *child* within a *parent* information element. Each instance is a *flag instance*, *field instance*, or *assembly instance*, and either references an existing [*top-level definition*](/specification/syntax/definitions/) by name or provides an [*inline definition*](/specification/syntax/inline-definitions/). In a Metaschema module, an instance appears inside the definition of its parent information element: an *assembly definition* may contain flag, field or assembly instances reflecting the objects to be permitted in that assembly, while a *field definition* may also include flag instances, defining its flags. Flag definitions, both *top-level* and *inline*, will never contain instances since flags have no children in the model, only values.
```

(Or have I only made it *more confusing*)?

Author: I'll apply the following, which slightly modifies your suggestion above.
```suggestion
An *instance* is used to declare an information element *child* within a *parent* information element. Each instance is a *flag instance*, *field instance*, or *assembly instance*, and either references an existing [*top-level definition*](/specification/syntax/definitions/) by name or provides an [*inline definition*](/specification/syntax/inline-definitions/).

In a Metaschema module, an instance appears inside the definition of its parent information element.
- An *assembly definition* may contain flag, field or assembly instances reflecting the objects to be permitted in that assembly.
- A *field definition* may only include flag instances.
- A Flag definition will never contain instances since flags have no children in the model, only values.
```

One problem with zero-or-more cardinality as supported by `fields` and `assemblies` is that in JSON, no suitable structure is available for the inclusion of truly arbitrary but repeatable properties or 'contents' (as to its structural type) on an object. The closest thing is an array, which can be pulled into use for this -- at the cost of not permitting a JSON property label on items in the array. In order to capture the same information as is transparently available on the XML, it is therefore necessary to 'finesse' the JSON object type: Metaschema does this by mapping each field or assembly in a zero-or-many set, to an array with the corresponding number of items. The name of the objects can thus be captured implicitly, by naming (labeling) their containing array.

> This works, but there are also occasions when a much more concise mapping may also be supported -- if the data can be ensured to follow another rule, namely that data elements (string data) can be known to be uniquely-valued. In these cases there is a different option, namely to promote a flag of a particular known (and controlled) type, to a role as "address" -- which can (incidentally) serve as a label on a JSON property, thus improving both presentation, and addressability.

Reviewer: Doesn't this reflect an old design since superseded? as we now have `<json-key-flag>`... maybe want to mark this as in need of revision. No `field/@address` appears in the Metaschema schema currently (for example).

Author: Indeed. I haven't reworked this.

###### `@in-xml="GROUPED"`

TODO: P2: complete this section.

###### `@in-xml="UNGROUPED"`

TODO: P2: complete this section.

##### `@name`

The REQUIRED `@name` attribute declares the grouping name to use in JSON, YAML and XML (when exposed).

In JSON and YAML, this name is used as the property name.

In XML, the specific use of the `@name` is based on the `@in-xml` attribute's value.

{{<callout>}}
While not required, use of a plural form of the [effective name](#naming-and-use-name) for the instance is a general convention applied to `<group-as>` naming.
{{</callout>}}

### Instance Naming

Given the set of instance names for a *definition*, a given *instance* on that definition MUST have a unique effective name. If the instance allows a [maximum cardinality](#max-occurs) greater than `1`, the [`<group-as name>`](#name) MUST also be unique within the set of *instance names* for the *definition*.

For *field instance* values, the effective name of the value, based on a `<json-value-key>` or `<json-value-key-flag>` MUST also be unique within the set of *instance names* for the *definition*. This ensures that the property name for the *field* value is unique in JSON and YAML.

> For *field instances* that use [`@in-xml="UNWRAPPED"`](#in-xml-1), no other effective instance name in the within the set of *instance names* for the *definition* MUST be named in a way that matches the allowed element contents of the [markup-multiline data type](/specification/datatypes/#markup-multiline) in XML. This ensures that a naming clash with markup data is disallowed.

Reviewer: Another Issue to go with #366: align Metaschema Schematron checks with these rules.
